>>REGINA MEREDITH:
This story is not
meant to ruin our Sunday
morning bacon and eggs, rather
to help us become more
discerning about how
the pig that gave us the
bacon lived their life.
Toward that end,
information will
help us make better
decisions in our purchasing.
Lady Tracy Worcester is
spending her entire life
educating people as to the
difference between farm
and factory raised pork.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REGINA: It's so
good to have you here.
I had the pleasure of meeting
with you off camera beforehand
to find out a little
bit more about you.
And what an interesting
life you have.
And you're in a
unique position to be
able to spend your time
doing exactly what you love.
And that's what we were
talking about off camera.
So before we get
going on the subject
at hand-- which
is a little harsh,
we're going to have a
little bit of video in it,
but very necessary for us to
be aware of-- our audience
would like to know
more about you.
>>LADY TRACY WORCESTER: Right.
Well, I was an actress.
And in love with a
man who, for two years
we were going out together,
and then when he proposed
and I wanted to stay with
him and have children,
I decided to give up
acting and to work
in a field which I've
always cared about,
which is the environment.
So I started working at Friends
of the Earth as a volunteer.
And day one, I
never turned back.
Because it was so
fascinating, and the people
were so interesting and
caring and loving and giving.
And you could see how, actually
the most selfish way to live
is to give, because
you get so much back.
So to give to this movement
was hugely rewarding
because you'd be
involved in campaigns
like rainforest destruction.
So in that you would be
looking at the world's lungs.
You would be looking
at world's species.
So I became more
and more involved.
So when I had children,
we were in London
and I could just, during the
holidays, be with the kids.
And then while they were
at school, campaign.
So my connections, either
from my background or from
my marriage to a marquess,
which is really--
my name's marchioness and--
>>REGINA: And they
call you lady.
>>WORCESTER: And so--
well, marchioness
can turn into a lady, as
can duchess or any title
can just have a shortened lady.
So Lady Worcester,
Tracy Worcester.
And so I used the contact--
because sometimes the media
would be more interested in me
because it was the marchioness.
But it was a double edged
sword because they'd
say Lady Muck gets her
hands dirty by looking
at organic food growing, local
food for the local farmers
market.
And I had a little
store in my garden
and the local shop
and Bath farmers
market, which was the first
one to open in this country,
and now there's like 400.
So I've always been supporting
the local food movement.
>>REGINA: And what
you're talking about
is a double edged
sword in the media
for getting your fingernails
dirty when people would guess
you would be at a tea
party instead, for example.
That is a-- it's a misnomer.
But this reminds me
of Prince Charles.
And I know that in
this country there
seems to be a very strange
relationship toward Prince
Charles and his work
in the-- not just
environmental movement--
organics and so forth.
And the stories seem
a little parallel.
And I think I read that
he attended your wedding.
Is that accurate?
>>WORCESTER: Yes.
>>REGINA: OK.
So did the two of you ever--
have you ever kind of connected
on the level of your activism?
>>WORCESTER: Yes, in
that he's obviously
promoting, in an
incredibly important way,
organic, local--
scale is important,
but it's not everything.
Because if you have
a giant organic farm,
the costs are internalized so
the smaller ones can compete.
So I remember at one point when
the media was being quite cruel
to me if I'd say
something which was
against the big corporations,
I remember he wrote back
and he said, just don't read
the interviews that you do.
You just have to keep going
because you believe in it.
But there's a hell of a
lot of people out there
who are protective of their
ways of farming, which
might be to try and stay in
business, to pour chemicals
all of over the land because
that is mass production,
and if you get more
out of the land--
>>REGINA: Of course.
>>WORCESTER: The common
agricultural policy
is to pay you more money.
>>REGINA: So you're going
to be slammed in the media.
>>WORCESTER: So there
was always the mixture.
Some people appreciate it,
some people couldn't help
but doing a stab or two.
And I just had to rise above
it and just keep campaigning.
And I remember fondly enough
one of my first interviews
in television when I was-- did
a rainforest ball with Imran
Khan.
And the interviewer said,
you're doing this work
for the ecological movement
because you quite obviously
feel so guilty being so wealthy.
>>REGINA: What a
presumptuous statement.
>>WORCESTER: Well, do
you know something?
I respect where
he's coming from.
Because there is a hell of a
lot of poverty in the world,
and there's a hell of a lot
of very, very wealthy people.
And the gap between the
wealthy and the poor
is growing ever wider.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>WORCESTER: And
we have to be aware
that obviously that is wrong.
And therefore, we
need to look at how
to make sure that
people have enough.
And that people who
are small scale growers
are paid enough money so that
they can feed their populous.
>>REGINA: And not just
enough, but quality.
>>WORCESTER: Yep.
>>REGINA: Back to quality again.
And so going back
to his statement,
I said it was
presumptuous because I
think that is
presumptuous to say that.
However, was he accurate
or was this something
born entirely out of another
place of you-- inside you?
>>WORCESTER: Do
you know something?
I'm not going to take away
his presumption to say,
you've got too much.
There's a lot of you
that have too much.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK.
>>WORCESTER: So some
of you are going to go,
I've got to give back.
So whether he calls it guilt or
whether he calls it conscience
or whether he calls it you've
got the time and the privilege
that you don't
need to get a job.
And frankly, to get a job in the
environmental movement today,
it's so sought after that
your degree and your ability
to write and public speak--
now, I didn't have that.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>WORCESTER: So--
>>REGINA: You were
positioned well enough
that you could do it.
>>WORCESTER: I could just do it.
So what I started by
doing was fundraising
for the movement,
particularly Friends
of the Earth and the
Soil Association.
And then I started
to write for them,
and then I got involved with a
group called the International
Society for Ecology and Culture.
And when she was away, I used
to do public speaking for her.
So I was sort of quite
put in the deep end.
But she was very, very
important because not only was
she saying that this global
trading system is fundamentally
wrong, but she was saying we
have to shift to the local.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>WORCESTER: We have to move our
production system to actually
site here to sell here,
and particularly food.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>WORCESTER: And in this
country-- we live on an island.
And many of the politicians
and big business
just say, well, we've
got the money from GDP.
We can buy in our crops.
We can't.
Because sooner or later, whether
it's the greenhouse effect
or these wars that we're
creating across the world,
increasingly the soil,
with too many chemicals,
is becoming degraded.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>WORCESTER: We're
have desertification.
People are going
turn around and say,
I'm not giving you my land to
feed your markets for peanuts--
>>REGINA: Right.
Ultimately--
>>WORCESTER: --and not
paying us properly.
We want this food.
You look after yourselves.
And there are no farmers because
they've all gone bankrupt.
So what I'm doing
now is I want a life
raft of small scale
or large scale,
but farmers that are farming
in a way that is sustainable
which is nurturing the soil
which has pure seeds, not
genetically engineered
seeds, which are healthy,
which are able to
take up the minerals,
nutrients from the soil, into
the plant and into our bodies
do that we're actually healthy.
And I've had
another little scare
to make sure that
I do eat healthy.
And that is that I had cancer.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>WORCESTER: And every
single doctor from whoever
across the world is looking
at complementary medicine
to the traditional.
I did do the mastectomy and
the chemo and the Herceptin,
but I also did
the supplementary,
which is vitamins and
lysine, which is Doctor Roth.
And lots of supplements
that make sure that along
with a basically vegan diet
with a little bit of proteins--
but a lot of proteins come
from alternatives to meat.
Your diet is really
rich, and it's organic.
>>REGINA: Mmhmm.
Absolutely.
>>WORCESTER: So
I've never actually
felt healthier than when
I took to being a vegan.
>>REGINA: Well, there's
the silver lining.
>>WORCESTER: Yep.
>>REGINA: And so what you
were just saying a moment ago,
our governments
feel that we can,
for the foreseeable future,
look to other countries
to produce their crops for us
when those countries themselves
can't afford the crops
for their own people.
This seems completely
unsustainable in the long term.
>>WORCESTER: Well,
what's quite interesting
now is the corporations and
the governments are still
neoliberal with their
attitude to everything.
But increasingly, the Food
and Agriculture Organization,
which is the part of the
UN, particularly the most
recent special repertoire
on food and farming,
is saying local farmers,
small scale farmers, women,
have the land to feed
your family first.
And that's called
food sovereignty.
>>REGINA: And that happens
quite a lot in Africa.
It's the women that have the
small patches, the women that
own the cow.
>>WORCESTER: Well,
apparently 70% of the world
is still fed by
small scale farmers.
So in fact, this
mass consolidation
of farms across the world
is relativity small.
It's 30%.
It's new.
It's modern.
It's being promoted by
the agri industries.
And they are uber powerful.
>>REGINA: Yes, they are.
>>WORCESTER: And so
the agri industry
is now recognizing
that a lot of us
are getting very sick from their
chemicals, and we're objecting.
We don't want them.
And so they're coming up with
genetically engineered food.
>>REGINA: Oh, yes.
Oh, don't get us going.
>>WORCESTER: So we
have a huge number
of people who are
saying, hang on a minute.
That's more of the same.
That's extremely poisonous.
The countries which
have their fields
covered in glyphosate, which
is the weed killer which
goes with the genetically
engineered seeds.
>>REGINA: We know it
in America as Roundup.
>>WORCESTER: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Mmhmm.
>>WORCESTER: OK.
Well, people are
very sick from that.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>WORCESTER: And actually,
my working with pigs-- I
spoke to a pig
farmer the other day
and he said that
so many of the pigs
were being born with
deformities or dead.
And he just couldn't understand
this huge increase and why
all the farmers were
just accepting it.
So he thought, well,
I'm going to change back
to conventional feed.
And a tiny proportion
were then dying.
Tiny compared to
when they were being
fed genetically
engineered crops.
So we need to look at
not only that we're not
going to eat genetically
engineered crops directly,
but we shouldn't
even be eating meat
that are being feed with
genetically engineered crops.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And this is the hidden
affect that people
don't take into consideration.
>>WORCESTER: Just
have to read about it.
It's all there on the internet.
>>REGINA: Oh, OK.
Well, let's talk about
what's on the internet.
Because I did watch
the documentary
"Pig Business," which you
were the narrator and host of.
And you did a beautiful
job in documenting
the nature of this business and
the knocked on effects of it.
But let's start-- first
of all, why did you
choose the subject of pig
farming and industrialization
of pig farming?
>>WORCESTER: Because
our farming system
is fundamentally flawed
across the board.
So when I did public
speaking, people
used to thank me for taking
the lid off the system.
So I thought, how can I
show people the system,
but within an
amount of time where
they can stomach
watching something?
So I have to start with one
subject in the farming system
to be able to take it
up to how corporations
have taken over
our food economy.
So I decided, well, OK.
What's the most
important, urgent?
The most, really,
broken of the system.
And that's the pigs.
Because pigs are the
most amazing animals.
They are so beautiful.
>>REGINA: Please
tell us about pigs.
>>WORCESTER: They are so
clever, they are so charming.
They are the same
intelligence as our dogs.
And certainly in
this country, we're
famous for looking after
animals better, unfortunately,
than our kids.
We love animals.
So many people love pigs.
And actually, if you think
about it, a pig compared
to a chicken or a fish,
actually people love pigs.
And yet the cruelty that we're
inflicting on those pigs,
I think, is really a
reflection of how badly we're
prepared to behave
on a broader issue.
>>REGINA: Well, yes.
>>WORCESTER: Whether it
vivisection or our children.
And other people
across the world.
We're so cruel.
But with animals, actually,
we have a soft spot.
So I thought, OK, I'll
go to the emotional side.
And I'll show all
the external costs.
And so this beautiful,
huge animal,
the ideology of the neocon,
liberal-- and the union
that represents the
farmers in this country
has this ideology,
which let's make
a three ton-- no, two ton pig.
In other words, you're going
to have little rhinoceroses
in these sheds so that you
can double the amount of meat
on the pig.
So you're producing
monsters that can't move,
that are made almost
like you're producing
a more sophisticated car.
Do we want to do
that to our animals?
Yes, they've been bred
to being good for eating.
But actually, very
often those breeds
are not really very
good at continuing
the life of a happy
pig, which is outside
or has access to outside.
They're being bred presently
to just about stomach
sitting in a crate
all their life,
stuffed with antibiotics
to keep them alive.
Now as we know from
hospitals, when
you give too many
antibiotics, you
get antibiotic
resistant diseases.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>WORCESTER: Spread
between the pigs.
But it also goes
on to the worker,
goes out of the
ventilation shafts.
It goes into the
environment when
you spray it on the fields.
So people are ingesting
it through the water,
through the air, even
if you're a vegetarian.
>>REGINA: It's passed on through
their feces and the urine
and such, right?
>>WORCESTER: Yep.
It's biodegrading feces.
You have not only the
antibiotics in the feces,
but you also have a
problem which comes up
through the slats in the floors,
which is ammonia and hydrogen
sulfide from that feces, which
makes the workers extremely
sick, the neighbors very sick.
So you've got a system here
which is really very flawed
and nobody is internalizing it.
And in fact, whether it be
England, Europe, America,
China, India-- they're all
saying consolidate your pig
factories into these
giant consolidated animal
concentration camps.
>>REGINA: We're going to
go talk about one of them
in just a moment.
In fact, you feature
North Carolina in America
prominently in this film
and one particular company.
But before we go there, from
your current understanding
of the stats, what percentage
of the pork that we're eating,
in the Western world anyway,
is from these large factories
versus local farms?
>>WORCESTER: Well,
thing is I actually
only really know about England.
>>REGINA: OK, let's
go with England.
>>WORCESTER: So
England, I would say,
it's 60% of the pork on
the supermarket shelf
is from a factory.
OK?
40% is from outdoor bred,
which means-- because we
had those crates
banned in this country
10 years ago thanks to
Compassion in World Farming--
the farmers had to
find another way.
And what they
decided was economic
was to have to mama outside.
So 40% of those moms are
outside having their litters.
Which is fantastic.
It's the highest in the world.
And then those piglets come in.
Only 2% stay outside.
And they usually
come in to farms
with straw, which is called
Freedom Food standard.
So we have the choice, as
consumers in this country,
to choose meat from
farms that the animal has
had a decent life,
where you haven't
had antibiotic resistant
diseases-- because those pigs
outside and in sheds with
straw with enough room
up to the Freedom
Food standards,
they don't need antibiotics.
So you're not going to see
the end of antibiotics thanks
to a farming system
which doesn't internalize
the real cost of
this cruel system
where they're in a crate which
is pouring into Britain thanks
to our own higher standards.
Which actually has been
not kind on farmers
because a lot of
the farmers have
gone bankrupt because
of the higher price.
So they've chosen to buy the
cheaper pork on those shelves.
So that's why I've taken
it on myself, because I've
spoken to so many people who say
I would buy high animal welfare
pork, but it's more expensive.
And what difference does it
make if I do it on my own?
So I know that if it became
a huge movement, if we stood
in solidarity against the
corporations and the cruelty,
we would have many, many more
pigs that had had decent lives.
And we would--
otherwise what happens,
you go into your supermarket and
you see rows and rows and rows
and rows of cheap-- people
piling their baskets from
the cheap--
>>REGINA: From Tesco and--
>>WORCESTER: And then a
tiny, tiny little section,
which is a little
bit more expensive,
and you just think,
why should I do that?
>>REGINA: How much
more expensive?
>>WORCESTER: Well, we'd say
that two sausages from a factory
farm costs the same as one and a
half from a high animal welfare
farm.
And anyway, what the
doctors are saying is
we're eating too much meat.
And many of us have
parents or at least
grandparents who remember
when meat was a treat.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And served in very
tiny portions.
>>WORCESTER: Yeah.
And that's sustainable.
We could eat a small
portion of meat per day.
Not only sustainable
for the planet,
sustainable for our health
with antibiotic resistance
not needed anymore.
But actually healthier because
the doctors are saying you're
getting cancer,
obesity, heart disease
from eating too much protein.
So we need to reduce it
anyway to be healthier.
And wouldn't we prefer to
take back control of our food?
Because who do we dote on more
than anybody in the world?
Our kids.
OK, so what we'd really like
is to have a planet which
can sustain their lives
to feed themselves.
Well, I'm afraid
the factory farming
system is totally unsustainable
because also you're
growing crops in areas
that were rainforest.
So you're replacing
the lungs of the Earth
with all the species that
we need for medication,
chopping it down, and having
it as soil plantations
to feed pigs many,
many miles away.
You've got a sort
of global system.
>>REGINA: Let's talk
about the feed supply.
And let's start at the feed end.
Normally pigs would be fed
whatever the farmer feeds them
in their hay in the pen, right?
Or they would feed on grass.
Do they feed on grass as well?
>>WORCESTER: Yes.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
So they would be
out there grazing?
>>WORCESTER: Yes.
>>REGINA: OK.
So we know what a normal
diet would look like.
But what do pigs in the
factories environment
actually eat?
Where does it come from?
And let's talk about the trickle
down effect of their food--
not even including the
genetically modified element.
Just the way they food is
produced, where it's produced,
what the toxic effects
are to the communities
and the environment
at large onto the pig.
>>WORCESTER: Right.
Well, in America there used
to be loads and loads--
and I mean millions.
And in fact, the
same number of pigs
produced 80 years ago
as there is today.
But there were many, many small
farmers with the pigs outside
and they would eat the grass.
But they would also
be looking for roots.
And all of our excess
food-- proteins
as well-- would be
given to the pigs.
They would be extremely
healthy and lots of money
going to local farmers.
>>REGINA: And they called
it pig slop in America.
>>WORCESTER: Yeah.
>>REGINA: The bucket of
leftovers right into the pen.
>>WORCESTER: Exactly.
And then you eat
the pig and then
the pig's feces is very, very
sustainable into the soil.
There's not too much of it so
it doesn't pollute the river.
Whereas now, what
Murphy decided to do
was, just like the chicken
industry led by Tyson,
he would shove the
pigs in these crates.
So he would make all the
money and take that away
from the small scale farmers.
There was so much feces
coming out of those sheds,
it was far too much to
put on the land locally.
So the pollution is
intolerable, both for the health
of the local people because
of the hydrogen sulfide
and ammonia from the
biodegrading feces on the land.
So the villagers get sick.
So you've also got a
huge amount of soil
coming in from what were
rainforest areas or cerrado
areas, places like Argentina,
transported-- actually
in America, I think
quite a lot of that soil
is grown locally in America.
But in Europe, it all
comes from South America,
replacing forests.
A huge footprint as far
as transport is concerned.
And as it's a protein plant, it
would be much better in Europe
if we grew our own protein
plants on the farm.
Because those plants replace
nutrients from the soil.
So they're very, very
healthy to grow locally.
So really what we
would like to see
is a site here to sell
here attitude of our food.
So--and it would be as
sustainable as the consumer
chooses.
So I would say there's
a range of symbols
in this country from UK-- you
can choose UK where you have
the better crate system
where they're only allowed
to be in a crate when
they've had their babies.
OK?
Or you go higher and
you go to Freedom Food
where they're not
in a crate at all.
When they're having their babies
they're-- it's just much larger
space.
Or-- and they're not allowed,
obviously again in England,
in the crate at all
when they're pregnant.
And they've got straw
with Freedom Foods.
Or you go higher to outdoor
bred and then outdoor raised
or free range.
Or best of all is organic, where
the feed cannot be genetically
engineered.
>>REGINA: And so really
it's been the consumer that
has driven this
for the most part?
Is it really that we're--
the industry can succeed
because we're that
cost conscious?
You're talking about running
thousands, tens of thousands,
hundreds of thousands of
small farmers out of business.
Give of us a diagram of how
that happens, how that occurs,
so that these
kinds of industries
can succeed at
everybody's expense.
>>WORCESTER: Well,
what they appeal
to is our desire to
buy things cheap.
So they will make
the pork cheaper.
So they'll push down the price.
And basically what
happens is they
will buy up many, many farms.
And they will have these huge
concentration camps of animals.
And they will make sure that
that animal is very, very
cheap.
But as they make the
money from the packets--
because they've
slaughtered the pigs,
they've processed the
pigs-- they don't really
care how cheap the
pig is for them.
So all of the farmers are
bankrupt because they cannot
afford--
>>REGINA: They can't compete.
>>WORCESTER: No.
They can't sell anywhere,
their pigs to slaughterhouses,
because they're all owned
by these giant processing
companies like Smithfield.
And so you're
getting a situation
where there are no small scale
farmers because the consumer is
going to the supermarket.
But in Britain, you actually do
have a very conscious consumer
thanks to campaigns
like Compassion
in World Farming and
the Soil Association.
And us, which is called
Farms Not Factories.
And I've worked now for 26 years
in the environmental movement.
And I've found myself
speaking in venues
where I could literally
recognize most of the audience.
And I realized that we're not
getting our message out far
enough.
So I turned to film.
And so I made "Pig Business,"
which went out on Channel Four.
It went-- we took it
to the UK government.
We took it to the
EU and to Congress.
And then it's gone global;
it's sold globally.
And then we decided
to answer requests
to people in many
different countries
to come and film the
situation for them.
And we basically did a film in
Romania, in Ecuador, in Chile,
in America, and Canada.
>>REGINA: Poland featured.
>>WORCESTER: In Poland.
That was in the
main film in which
we featured America and Poland.
And actually, we won
a prize in Romania,
and we've just today
heard that we've
won a prize for
our Chilean film.
So it's basically trying
to get the message.
And when people say to me,
I've seen your film , Tracy,
and I don't buy that
cheap pork anymore.
>>REGINA: No, I don't see how
anyone that could see the film
would do that again.
>>WORCESTER: And it's not just
looking at the cruelty, is it?
>>REGINA: No, it's not.
You're looking all
of the implications.
But I have to say,
I think it only
takes about 30 or
40 frames of seeing
how these little pigs
live to turn you away
from factory raised pork.
I actually have to
say, I was a vegetarian
for 20 years solely on
animal rights issues,
not because of health at all.
I had no need to be
on a health level,
that I was aware of anyway.
But watching your film, it
kept bringing tears to my eyes.
Just the little bits.
And you were not gratuitous.
I didn't think the film
was gratuitous in any way.
You didn't pound people with it.
But if you have any
sensitivity toward animals,
you can see that this
is completely immoral
to treat animals in this way.
>>WORCESTER: Yeah.
What I wanted to
show is-- actually,
I don't go into the cruelty.
>>REGINA: No, you did not.
No, you didn't.
>>WORCESTER: There
is appalling cruelty.
But I wanted to appeal to people
who actually don't so much care
about the animals as well.
People who realize that
they're going to get sick
because you have to
give these animals
antibiotics to keep them alive.
And you get antibiotic bacteria
coming out of those sheds.
And government officials,
doctors, medical people
and World Health
Organization have said,
it is serious what we're doing.
Giving the antibiotics that
we give humans to the pigs
and seeing them mutate into
antibiotic resistant bacteria.
We will die of
illnesses that we could
very easily-- before
this antibiotic resistant
bacteria problem--
we could easily cure.
We're going to die
from those diseases.
So it appeals to
people on many levels.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And let's get into some
of the issues regarding
what it's doing to the local
populations and cultures, where
pig farming was happening
quite naturally.
We can go into
the North Carolina
scenario and Smithfield
and talk about what
happens surrounding the pig
farms with the local populace.
This is another
area you went into.
You really did a good job of
going into all of the effects.
>>WORCESTER: Well,
I believe that if we
are to keep human
beings on the planet,
we need to have farmers
with real skills
that are not
dependent on chemicals
and mechanization,
which uses oil.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>WORCESTER: And these factory
farms, they are so huge.
They're all mechanized.
The feed is mechanized.
The whole system is incredibly
expensive, even to build it.
And in fact, in Canada we
were with a organic outdoor
raised incredibly
beautiful pig farmer.
And he said that
farmers came to his farm
and said if only I
hadn't become mechanized.
Because I invested so much of my
money that I'm totally in debt.
I'm not making money
from having consolidated.
And I would love to
be farming like this.
And more and more
people are demanding
the outdoor raised,
the healthier pig.
And so we need to not only buy
the food from those farmers
which are hanging on by
their fingernails to try
and look after
their pigs properly
to sell to the
local communities,
we need to buy those
animals so that we
keep our skilled
farmers farming.
>>REGINA: And we keep the people
that live there and around them
healthy.
These people have
horrific effects.
It sounds like particularly
respiratory effects and sinus
effects and such from
living around these very
large facilities.
>>WORCESTER: Well, we're
fighting the Midland Pig
Producers at the moment,
who have been backed
by a multi-multimillionare
who want to have planning
permission to build a 25,000
pig pig shed, which is small
compared to American
standards, but it's
huge in terms of
British standards.
And it's 150 yards
from a women's prison.
>>REGINA: Oh, goodness.
>>WORCESTER: So these
women can't get away
from exactly what you
were talking about.
>>REGINA: Can't even breathe.
>>WORCESTER: Which
is the ammonia,
which stops their
bronchi working.
The hydrogen sulfide,
which is stink
like a sort of rotten egg.
It makes them depressed.
The noise, the lights
all night, the cruelty,
the squeals from the animals.
And I actually got
a doctor to-- sorry.
Actually we got a lawyer
to write to the council
to say if you give permission
for this animal factory
and any of the
prisoners get sick,
they could sue you in
the court of human rights
because you knew from
all the information--
>>REGINA: What the
effects were going to be.
Yes.
>>WORCESTER: --on the
internet about how
people get sick living
outside these factory farms.
>>REGINA: You've
gone to some length
to bring this
information forward.
You've traveled to these places.
And were you-- where were you?
Were you were you in
America or were you
in Poland when--
I saw you climbing
a fence in the documentary
trying to get closer
to get images from inside.
We're going to,
while we're talking,
show just a little bit of film.
You weren't able to
get your crew inside
once you climbed over
the fence, but you
said that another crew
was able to do that,
and they were able to
surreptitiously get
some of the film of
the living conditions.
And, my God.
Watching these poor little pigs.
It's almost like watching
maggots moving over each other.
They're so packed together.
>>WORCESTER: Later
in the same year,
another team from
Compassion and World Farming
managed to do what I'd struggled
to do the year before-- get
inside one of Smithfield's farms
at the village of Wojkowice.
[GRUNTING]
>>WORCESTER: Pigs
in factory farms
are usually raised
on bare slats,
but even on straw they
don't look healthy.
[GRUNTING]
>>MALE SPEAKER: A
number of dead pigs.
[GRUNTING]
>>WORCESTER: Well, I
think that people do care.
They really do when they see
those films and the internet
is full them.
And they just have to--
some of the women just
get scared that they
would be made ill
from the depression
of seeing the way
that we're treating
these animals
and they just don't
watch it and they just
carry on buying the cheap meat.
>>REGINA: That's
what I'm saying.
We can turn a blind eye to it.
We have that ability in the
face of incredible cruelty.
>>WORCESTER: Well, that's
what my work is about now.
I'm trying to
influence consumers
by making short films,
funny films, making
it a short but very,
very informative film
so that they are aware of
what their choices mean.
And we will go on
using celebrities
like Stephen Fry or
Bobby Kennedy or--
>>REGINA: Oh, he was
a hero in your film.
Robert Kennedy, Jr.
>>WORCESTER: Yeah.
Isn't he amazing?
>>REGINA: And he's a wonderful
activist in this area.
>>WORCESTER: Yeah.
He's such a good man.
He's so articulate.
And I got a lot of
high profile people
who are prepared to
take the message further
than quite a lot of
NGOs are able to do.
So that's my sort of
contribution to the movement.
And I work with a
very good filmmaker
who can make these very
short, very savvy films.
And we just need
more and more people
to sign the pig pledge, which
means if they do eat meat,
to ensure that it comes from
a farm, not an animal factory.
>>REGINA: A factory.
You know, this is actually--
you don't hear as much
about it in the United
States as in Britain.
It's not as obvious that
you have these local choices
a lot of times.
But that said, are you familiar
with Niman Ranch in America?
>>WORCESTER: Mmhmm.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: Now they've
made great headway.
And can you talk about
Niman Ranch a bit?
And can you talk
about the difference
between the ones that are--
what's it called, depenned?
The way they're raised
in straw where everything
breaks down very
naturally beneath them
if they are in a pen.
They can move around.
They stay with their families.
This is a big deal,
that the animals
stay with the families they
were born into socially
is more healthy for them.
So talk a little bit
about Niman Ranch.
Because you can find
that in most stores
with any consciousness
at all now in the US.
>>WORCESTER: Yeah.
I'd say that Britain
and America is
really good at having these
high animal welfare labels.
So all we have to do
is inform ourselves
a little bit from maybe
watching the films,
from very good campaigns like
the Humane Society in America.
Or look up Bobby
Kennedy and he's
fought so many cases to try
to sue these big companies so
that they have to
start obeying the law.
And that's why I believe
Smithfield has come over
to Europe.
Because actually it's been
restrained quite a lot
in America.
So it's trying to
change our farms
into these gargantuan farms.
And you had a very,
very good film
which was made in America
called "Food, Inc."
that just-- look it up.
Watch it.
Become informed.
Recognize that this is
a corporate takeover
of our lives.
Capitalism is now
corporate capitalism.
So you have a very,
very few companies
which are so wealthy
that they pay
for the elections
of the government.
So whether you're a
Democrat or a Republican,
these lobby groups have
poured money onto both sides
so that whether one or
other gets into power,
it's still the same
neoliberal agenda.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And you interviewed Bernard
Lietaer, as I recall.
Can you talk about your
experience with him
and what he had to say?
Because he's the
brilliant-- well,
he was supposedly one of
the architects of the Euro.
But he was also the
co-author of a book
called "Money for a New World."
And you really are in
alignment with this notion
that the economy
itself-- and that's
why you started
with food, we all
need it-- really needs
to have a serious shakeup
and realignment.
So if you'll tell us a little
bit about your experience
with Lietaer.
>>WORCESTER: Well,
I believe that we
have some very fundamental
problems on this planet
if we are going to
sustain humans at all.
So it's like-- if
you don't really
care about human beings carrying
on, then carry on as per usual.
But actually, if you do think
the world is very beautiful
and you do think that people
are capable of changing
and you do have children
and you want them to not
be in total chaos
and starvation,
then you have to start
informing yourself.
And part of that is to look
at how an economic system that
puts profit before the well
being of people and the planet,
then we have a problem.
And it's the growth economy.
So if you're constantly
looking at how each year
your economy can
grow up to 3%, really
that's all about how
much more we can dig out
of our resources,
out of our planet.
More oil, more minerals.
So it's more mines.
It's more for people to buy
more to fill their houses,
to fill their lives, and
to put in the trash can.
And really, we don't need that.
We actually would be
perfectly well off with less.
We just are looking at, for
example, walking to work
or having a school which is near
or having shops which are near
or food which is grown
in the hinterland, which
is able to come to us in
a way that is sustainable.
We do not need to go to
war with the Middle East
to try and get that
constant flow of cheap oil.
So we are dictating
what their policies
by putting dictators
into their countries.
And consequently, you're
getting fundamentalist attitudes
to get rid of that American
influence, which is very, very
dangerous, both in
country and for us.
So the more we bomb
those countries,
we know it's about cheap oil.
And the more we
bomb them, the more
we'll get people over
here who want revenge.
Because they've had
their family killed,
tortured, raped by a system
that we are propping up
with our money to get
constant cheap oil.
We don't need that.
>>REGINA: Constant
cheap everything.
>>WORCESTER: We need to
reduce our intake of energy,
number one.
And then we need
renewable energy.
And then we need to look at a
more local system of farming,
number one.
And that's our choice,
our shopping choices,
because democracy
is not working.
Because the choice that you
have between-- in this country
it's the Labor or Lib
Dem or the Conservatives.
They're all bow-tying
to their pay masters.
Whoever pays the
piper calls the tune.
And that's the same in your
country with the Democrats
and the Republicans and
the same in this country.
We need to have a look
at a political system
where what do we
really care about.
Are that any
politicians out there
that are representing
what we believe
is the right way to live a
happy life, a decent life?
And that would be more
jobs on the ground,
better pay in those jobs,
more local production
for local consumption.
Surely, we should not be going
down this globalization where
you've just got these
huge companies combing
the globe for cheaper labor,
lower environmental standards,
poorer standards at work.
You see the most horrendous
systems happening.
Tortuous systems for both
animals and human beings all
over the world.
And I tell you, the
environmental situation
is not going to get
better because there ain't
any money in mending the
planet until we choose
to buy in a way that is
conscious, informed shopping.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And I noticed yesterday
when I met with you,
you pulled up with your
ponytail and your sweater
and your dog behind
you on a bicycle.
Is this is how you personally
travel around London
quite a bit?
>>WORCESTER: Well, I don't--
>>REGINA: Well, it was
a sunny day, for one.
Today it wouldn't be so fun.
>>WORCESTER: Well, excuse me.
When we left, do you remember
it was like, oh, my God.
>>REGINA: It did.
It had started raining, yes.
>>WORCESTER: Oh,
here come the clouds.
Here comes the rain.
But I am English.
So I'm used to the rain.
And I spent the whole of
the afternoon with my banner
at the anti-war march.
So I actually love a bicycle.
In fact, I'm old enough
that when I went to Beijing,
70% of the traffic was bicycles.
And it was beautiful
and people were smiling
and they were having good
exercise and the air was pure.
I'm on my bicycle,
the air is disgusting.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>WORCESTER: You should see my
mask and my hat and my jacket.
[LAUGHTER]
>>WORCESTER: Trying to sort
of say, hello, I'm here.
Don't squash me, please.
But it is fun because
it's fresh air.
And how many of us are looking
at a screen all day long?
>>REGINA: And so your family
has access to great wealth.
And now what about
your children?
What have you passed on to them?
And what you say-- I
mean, how does that work?
As you said in the
beginning, there's
this huge equity
between, still, families
with wealth,
individuals with wealth.
It doesn't matter what part
of the world you're in.
And then the underclasses
and making sure
that they can have a
quality of life, too.
A decent, dignified
quality of life.
And I know it's
economy of scale.
It's never all going
to be the same.
But how do we address that?
How do you address that?
>>WORCESTER: I think that's one
of the most important issues
of our time.
That is, that the wealthy
are getting wealthier.
The number of them
is getting smaller,
but they're getting
wealthier and wealthier.
And forget the middle class.
You're going down to people
losing their middle class
status and going to
working to class.
Or not even.
I think most of are slaves.
Simply.
Actually, for me a
mortgage is like slavery.
>>REGINA: I agree.
>>WORCESTER: I went
to the dentist once,
and the receptionist was crying.
And I asked her what was wrong.
And she said she just had
to take her 16 week old baby
to a nursery because
she had to go back
to work to pay the 70,000
pound mortgage that they had
on their two bedroom flat
in the suburb of Bristol.
Now mortgages are a way that
banks can make uber money out
of us buying the most expensive
investment of our life.
But we're paying that
mortgage back all our life.
That's wrong.
If we lose our job for
a couple of months,
that interest on that money
becomes bigger and bigger.
And sometimes intolerable.
And actually, we should
look at a system which
is allowing people to
earn a decent living,
to get on to the house ladder
or to rent but to feel secure.
Their money's not just going.
People like-- particularly in
this country--to own their own
house.
Build your own house.
Don't have land that's
so uber expensive.
Build houses so
that people can live
in communities around gardens.
Grow your own food.
Take back control
of your own life.
>>REGINA: What if
they have nothing?
If they have so
little to begin with?
Which a lot of people are in
that position now all over.
And then the younger
generations, in particular.
How does that happen?
And I'm not suggesting there is
a redistribution of wealth that
is dictated.
I'm saying how does
this naturally occur,
where there's great wealth
filtering into the system
to help lift up
those who don't have
that ability or
that opportunity?
>>WORCESTER: Well,
I think that we
need to have a serious tax
system that ensures that people
don't hide their money abroad
and that the wealthy are taxed
in a way which will
level the playing field.
Because it's absurd
that sometimes
people can't afford-- even
if they have a full time
job-- to feed their family.
>>REGINA: No.
>>WORCESTER: And
I know in America,
Wal-Mart pays so badly that
people have to get food stamps
to afford to pay their--
>>REGINA: Their employees.
Yeah.
>>WORCESTER: So it's just absurd
that these huge businesses
are dictating the rules of game.
I don't believe our governments
are going to do anything.
This democratic
system doesn't work.
It's up to us.
We need to take back control.
We need to demand
the type of food
and the type of
pay that is fair.
We need to revitalize our
unions to represent us.
Join the union.
Because it's all been broken.
And a lot of the rules
protecting our health
have been broken.
And there's a terrifying new
treaty which is coming out.
Admittedly, there are about
5,000 treaties already,
which are all about trade
between nations, which--
>>REGINA: What's the new one?
>>WORCESTER: It's called
the Transatlantic Trade
and Investment Partnership.
TTIP it's called.
And it's about harmonizing
trade between the US and Europe.
Now, the US
regulations are so bad.
They've been rolled back so low
by the power of big business.
And Europe actually
has got a few laws
that protect our health.
>>REGINA: True.
A few.
>>WORCESTER: For example,
we have the Precautionary
Principle where
you have to prove
that your chemical is safe.
Whereas in America,
you have to prove
that that chemical is not safe.
OK?
So they will bring
the chemical out
and you had to prove
it's not for it to go.
And that is
impossible, virtually,
to prove that it's
not because you
have to get so many
people to come up
and the tests have
to warn that it
came from that product and
nothing else in their life.
So basically we're living in a
system which is so influenced
by money and our
politicians are completely
bought out by this system.
Because there isn't
a party, really,
that they can represent that
isn't bought out by the system.
Because the campaign
needs the money.
So if you have the
Green Party, it's
not going to get any
corporate money because it's
saying corporations
must be accountable,
it must be broken out.
>>REGINA: It didn't
work in the US.
>>WORCESTER: No.
So you have to
actually, I think,
revolutionize the economy
by taking back control.
And that is through
the way you bank,
through the way you
use your currencies.
So there are currencies in
this country called the Bristol
pound, the Totnes
pound, the Lewes pound.
And these are rolling out.
>>REGINA: Local currencies.
Yes.
>>WORCESTER: Yeah.
And a lot of countries like--
we were talking about Argentina
when it had it's
complete economic crisis.
The way that it got
itself out of trouble
was people actually invented
their own currencies
as a medium of exchange
which was fair.
At the moment the money system
is so slanted for big business
to be able to get as much money
as it wants to grow bigger.
It's not only subsidies,
direct subsidies,
but it's research and
development subsidies.
Everything is geared
to big business
to be able to compete
globally instead of helping
the small, the local, the
people to take control
over their own land to grow
food for themselves first,
their family, their community.
And then they should
have a diversity
of people who are
prepared to buy it--
small shops-- so that they
can go to a different person
if they're not
getting enough money.
But at the moment,
the supermarkets
just pay virtually for milk,
for example, the same as water.
>>REGINA: Yes.
It's heavily subsidized, too.
>>WORCESTER: Yeah.
>>REGINA: That's
another whole issue
we don't need to go
into because we know
about the subsidies
in both countries,
where the small farmer
is not subsidized.
If he goes belly up, who cares?
Except his kids, right?
>>WORCESTER: Yeah.
So we need a sort of
people power revolution
that we're all a part of.
We're all aware that
the corporations
are far too powerful.
And the information
is on the internet.
And for me, start by
signing the pig pledge
to say that you will
not eat any meat that
comes from a factory farm.
>>REGINA: Well, if they
watch your documentary, then
I think most people will be
very comfortable with signing
the pig pledge.
>>WORCESTER: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And also
just to go back
to Prince Charles for a moment,
because I greatly respect
his work, his book
called "Harmony," which
I was shocked to find
out not one person
that I know in Britain
had even heard of.
Now talk about
silencing a message.
We think of Prince Charles in
the community, the conspiracy
community, as almost--
well, one of the elite.
And so that has a
different meaning
in the conspiracy
community, of course.
But then I read the book
"Harmony," and I thought,
isn't it interesting
the nature of a person
who seems to be so disliked from
both sides can't be all bad.
I mean, his message
in the book is
very much along the line of
what you're talking about.
A beautifully written book.
So I mean, I guess I'm asking in
a roundabout way, what is this?
What kind of person-- is he for,
to begin with, that both sides?
>>WORCESTER: Well, I actually
think the public love Prince
Charles.
Really--
>>REGINA: I never
hear anyone say that.
>>WORCESTER: Real
respect for him.
But don't forget that
the media in Britain
is owned by the
elite, the corporate--
>>REGINA: Well, they're
certainly axing him out
of the program.
>>WORCESTER: Exactly.
So-- and also, he's
not selling anything.
So you're not really
going to get anybody
to promote his work
to sell their goods.
He's just giving a message,
which is truly benign,
and he is loved by
the Green Movement.
>>REGINA: I would guess.
Yes.
[LAUGHTER]
>>WORCESTER: He
is a huge godsend.
>>REGINA: I was just
shocked that no one, even
people who read a lot.
I mean, my very literate
friends in Britain
had never heard of his book.
Rupert Sheldrake's the
one that told me about it.
He said, Regina, did you know
Prince Charles wrote a book?
Because he was
saying, you really
should interview Prince Charles.
He said, did you know he
wrote a book called "Harmony?"
No.
So I started asking all my more
literate friends in Britain.
No one had heard of it.
He got no air time, no
newspaper time, no interviews,
no excerpts.
It's as though he
hadn't done a thing.
>>WORCESTER: Yeah.
I think that he does challenge
the status quo thinking
of growth and
expanding our markets
and buying new highly processed
very, very cheap-- maybe
they think that he's
appealing to an elite idealist
way of living.
And in fact, as far
as I'm concerned,
unless you look at an ideal--
>>REGINA: He's wholesome.
>>WORCESTER: --you are
actually compromising
to go along with
the system, which
is going to see the end the
human race on the planet.
>>REGINA: So what happens
if he ends up taking power?
Will his voice ever
be heard do you think?
I know everybody--
we see the articles
in our People Magazines,
too, over there.
>>WORCESTER: Well, I mean
hopefully when he becomes king,
then everybody will say,
hey, look what he wrote.
Look what he's--
he's a great man.
[LAUGHTER]
>>WORCESTER: He is a hero.
He's a Mahatma Gandhi and, ah.
We're so lucky to have him
because he does endorse
a lot of what people who
would be dismissed as not
practical because he is
advocating a way of eating
which is on your
supermarket shelf,
but you need to be informed of
why you need to choose that.
And the supermarkets
are very, very bad
for the image of
organic and alternative
because they up the price
hugely, disproportionately.
If you go to your farmers market
or you buy through the internet
or you get an able and
call box delivered,
the prices are much
more reasonable.
And also, for pork for
example, not only can you
reduce your meat
intake, but you could
buy the less popular cuts,
which are much cheaper.
And therefore, you'd still
have the diet that you like.
And it's delicious.
It's just not what's
advertised on the telly.
>>REGINA: Right.
We only have a
couple minutes left.
Any final thoughts?
>>WORCESTER: Well, I
would the pig pledge
to roll out globally.
And therefore people to take
back control of their food
economy and say, I'm not
going to buy from a factory.
I'm actually going to
buy from somewhere where
the animal's been looked
after, the money stays
in the locality, there
is no external pollution
to people's health or
to the environment,
to the water system.
And that's the way
that I want to protect
my planet for my
children to inherit.
>>REGINA: Mmhmm.
Just one simple
decision at a time.
And then, of course,
that awareness,
generally when people start
searching on the internet,
that awareness will lead to
another area of awareness,
whether it's the dairy
industry or whether it's
Monsanto and genetically
modified seeds and so forth.
It takes you from
one to the other.
So that's a really good
starting place, again
because of the emotions of it.
And I wanted to say,
I initially became
aware of what you're doing
through a mutual acquaintance
of ours, James Martinez, who
has to do with cold fusion.
And that's his area of interest.
Are there some
other areas that you
might be moving into having
to do with public awareness
after pigs?
>>WORCESTER: Well, I think
that I would probably
stay with food because food is
our number one need three times
a day.
And if we don't get the word
food sovereignty where you take
back control and you make
sure that that food is grown
as close to home as possible by
the skills of people who farm
for years-- you cannot pick
up these skills like that.
>>REGINA: Right.
It's multi-generational.
Yes.
>>WORCESTER: So I think
that probably fighting
for local food is
going to see me out.
But I obviously also
want local energy,
local currencies,
local everything.
>>REGINA: And do your children
live this way as well?
Having been raised by you?
A lot of times our kids rebel
and do the exact opposite thing
their parents are about.
>>WORCESTER: I tell you, my
kids are still quite young.
They are 19, 23, and 26.
And they're just
finding their way.
And as far as I'm concerned,
I want them to be happy first.
I want them to find
what they're good at.
And then when they
kind of really
start thinking who they are,
what the world needs, what they
want to feel that
they're respected about,
they might think, I could
do a little bit more
from my past education
from Mom to give back
and to make sure that the planet
is safe place for my kids.
>>REGINA: Well,
you're a good mom.
That's-- making sure your child
is happy first is number one.
And I want to thank you
so much for your time
and taking the time to
go out on your bicycle
with your little dog and meet
with me prior to this interview
so I could get to know you
a little bit better as well.
>>WORCESTER: My pleasure.
It was very nice to see
you before, actually.
Sort of feel we're friends.
>>REGINA: We knew right away.
>>WORCESTER: We had
so much in common.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
[MUSIC PLAYING]